[Music]
for American Protective League
the understaffed nature of the federal
intelligence institutions and mounting
fears of internal subversion disloyalty
and espionage conspiracies among the
American public during the World War
prompted an extraordinary development
and intelligence practices the
cultivation of a private organization to
provide supplementary assistance to
government agencies having responsible
for the detection surveillance and
capture of individuals thought to be a
threat to the nation's security just
before the eruption of hostilities in
Europe the Bureau of Investigation had
fostered an informer Network and efforts
to combat white slave traffic quote in
1912 bureau chief a Bruce Bielski
directed his agents to ask waiters
socialites and members of various
organizations to eavesdrop on private
conversations and to forward tips to
bureau offices if their suspicions were
aroused many prosecutions had resulted
from these tips from using volunteers
against organized vice to using them
against conspiracy to commit espionage
and sabotage was an easy transition end
quote
what made the espionage sabotage
detection arrangement unique was its
private organization character had
functioned as an institution in parallel
to the federal intelligence agencies
called the American Protective League
the group was a product of the efforts
of Chicago advertising executive
Albert M Briggs and two other wealthy
businessmen Victor L ting and Charles D
Frye footnote for the authorized but
unreliable history of the league see
Emerson Hoff the web Chicago the Reilly
and Lee Company 1919 and footnote in
late 1916 Briggs became concerned about
the inadequate strength and equipment of
the Bureau of Investigation and
subsequently urged bureau chief bill
ascii and attorney general thomas w
gregory to establish an auxilary force
to assist in pursuing security risks as
presented to
Justice Department Briggs's proposal
gave the following details quote its
purpose a volunteer organization to aid
the Bureau of Investigation of the
Department of Justice the object to work
with and under the direction of the
chief of the Bureau of Investigation of
the Department of Justice or such
attorney or persons as he may direct
rendering such service as may be
required from time to time membership
this organization is to be composed of
citizens of good moral character who
shall volunteer their service and who
may be acceptable to your department
construction it is proposed that
National Headquarters be established
either in Washington or perhaps Chicago
because of its geographical location and
that branch organizations be established
in such cities as your department made
erect finances it is proposed that
headquarters organization and branch
organizations shall finance themselves
either by outside subscriptions or by
its members control it is proposed that
each unit of this organization shall be
under the control of the government but
will report to and be under the
direction of the nearest Department of
Justice headquarters end quote
approval of the idea was given on March
20th 1917 and cities with high alien
populations were targeted as
organization centers for the APL notices
went out the same day to Bureau agents
across the country announcing that
Briggs was forming a volunteer committee
or organization of citizens for the
purpose of cooperating with the
department and securing information of
activities of agents of foreign
governments or persons unfriendly to
this government for the protection of
public property etc the group would
supply information upon request and at
its own volition was to operate in a
confidential manner and could exercise
no arrest power except after
consultation with the federal
authorities according to by Lasky's
notices quote APL organizing active
proceeded with great speed and amazing
secrecy and view of the method of
recruiting and the numbers of
individuals involved during the first
war months not until September 1917 did
minuscule newspaper notices acknowledge
publicly the existence of the league
Justice Department requests to
publishers for cooperation in retaining
APL anonymity achieved results in
mid-summer 1917 the league numbered
90,000 members organized in 600 locals
by war's end 350,000 APL agents staffed
1400 local units across the country by
January 1918 every federal attorney had
an APL Local at his disposal from a free
taxi service in Chicago the APL
developed swiftly into a nationwide
apparatus end quote footnote Harold M
Hyman to try men's souls loyalty tests
in American history Berkeley and Los
Angeles
University of California Press 1959 page
273 in footnote with the National office
in Washington League locals received
instructions through state directors who
also functioned as internal inspectors
general for the organization's and
directly from headquarters out of the
Capitol command post flowed circular
instructions to locals manuals of
operation assignments to investigations
and the league's weekly journal the
spyglass funding appears to have been
entirely private deriving from
contributions and membership fees at the
local level organization followed a
military pattern with ranks badges and
sworn oaths of loyalty large factories
and businesses with many League members
in their employ became self-contained
divisions with a pyramid structured
leadership but while the APL was a mass
membership group recruitment was
selective and class-conscious quote with
great acuity the league directors
searched among the upper social economic
and political crust of each community
four local Chiefs and members bankers
businessmen mayor's police chief's
postmasters ministers attorneys
newspaper editors officers of religious
charitable fraternal and patriotic
societies factory owners and foremen
YMCA workers and Chamber of Commerce
leaders insurance company executives and
teachers were favored sources of league
personnel such men possessed means and
leisure to devote to apol work and
opened their professional business and
official records for APL use many were
also members of draft boards war bonds
sale committees food and fuel rationing
units and state defence counsels
affording the league illicit access to
information denied even to commissioned
government investigators end quote
the intelligence mission which most
often inspired leaguers to probe
privileged files and otherwise private
depositories of personal information was
its responsibility as primary loyalty
investigator for the civil and military
services quote when the war started no
adequate mechanism existed for security
clearances the APL with Gregory's
permission assumed this task APL
instruction manuals and special issues
of the spyglass offered neophyte APL
investigators advice on how to make
character investigations one such
article suggested that the final success
or failure of American arms would depend
upon the quality of officer leadership
every applicant for a Military
Commission every civil servant with more
than clerical responsibilities all
welfare group officials who were to do
overseas work raided loyalty
investigations the APL newspaper warned
leaguers that a loyalty inquiry implied
no guilt and that unjustified innuendos
of disloyalty might ruin a career and a
life a confidential APL manual warned
that no two cases are exactly alike for
the reason that no two men are exactly
alike the pamphlet advised all APL
loyalty testers to examine a sub
stanshall cross-section of the subjects
ancestors in enemy countries his social
political and church affiliations his
attitude toward the Lusitania sinking
and the rape of Belgium what he had said
about war bonds draft dodgers and the
Espionage Act had he purchased enough
bonds dug Victory Gardens and appeared
at patriotic rallies did neighbors
recall untoward statements he might have
made did he own stock in enemy-held
corporations was his labor union
respectable but caution was the
watchword in loyalty hunting and the
manual pleaded for objectivity and
fullness in reporting officials would
normally put full credence in the
decision of the loyalty investigator APL
reports received almost complete
acceptance in Washington
thus the APL agents became the judge the
jury and sometimes the executioner and
the lives of many who knew nothing of
its existence end quote
the league became active in other
federal policy areas apart from loyalty
investigation including capturing
suspicious immigrants enforcing liquor
and vice control around military
cantonments investigating the background
of certain passport applicants and
probing the qualifications of persons
applying for American citizenship aside
from the Bureau of Investigation the
league's other great champion and
supporter was Colonel Ralph Van Diemen
and the Military Intelligence Division
of the War Department
then daemon had sought legally after it
was established later mi d F Ertz to
create a competitor to the APO and
directed that field personnel use only
league assistance in civilian
investigations in the matter of policing
war materiel production plants under
strike the league and military
intelligence worked closely to control
labor unrest eventually both justice and
war would sour on the zealous antics of
the APL trampling personnel sanctities
privacy and civil liberties badges which
poor The Legend Secret Service for a
time were flaunted as official authority
to do about anything the bearers wanted
to do Treasury secretary McAdoo
protested that they gave the public the
impression that their holders were
agents from his department a viewpoint
which leaguers did little to discourage
APL Raiders made arrests without proper
authorization and many carried firearms
on their missions in an effort to assist
the Justice Department some League
locals even tapped and tampered with
Telegraph and telephone lines quote even
when APL errs contented themselves with
investigations the result was wholesale
abuse of civil liberties and invasions
of privacy an investigation typically
began with a request forwarded from APL
headquarters in Washington to the city
chief who assigned the case to one of
his operatives once the operative
received this request he had numerous
investigative weapons from which to
choose membership in the APL provided
each operative with an entree to the
records of banks and other financial
institutions of real estate transactions
medical records and inevitably legal
records any material ordinarily
considered confidential by private firms
or corporations could be made available
to operatives even institutions
customarily regarded as repositories of
confidence and trust compromised their
standards Bishop Theodore Henderson
helped to spread the APL throughout the
Methodist Church with the result that
Methodist ministers could often be
approached for information about members
of their congregations liaison was also
established with Catholic Jewish and
Protestant churches the Maryland
casualty company of Baltimore asked its
agents throughout the country to join
the league so that insurance information
was readily available private detective
agencies would check old records and
disclose their contents anti-labor and
native istic groups opened their secret
files to the APL and quote official
interest in
services of the APL waned with the
arrival of attorney general a mitchell
Palmer in the spring of 1919 the death
knell sounded with the arrival of the
Republicans two years later still the
old ties were not easily broken quote as
late as 1924 military intelligence
officers were being instructed to
maintain friendly relations with former
APL members as well as other counter
radical groups who might be called upon
in time of trouble counter espionage
investigations had been discontinued but
questionnaires were being sent out to
collect information on domestic affairs
a few men and the military intelligence
realized that the mi da Matiz among the
civilian population had given them an
evil reputation that they must live down
by scrupulously avoiding civilian
investigations in the future one book on
military intelligence published in 1924
alarmed some officers because it told
how the Secret Service of the General
Staff and operated far beyond military
limits but 1924 marked the end of anti
radical activity for both the War
Department and the Justice Department
end quote no agency of the federal
government would ever again attempt to
cultivate so ambitious and visible and
intelligence auxilary as the American
Protective League footnote nevertheless
there are private intelligence
organizations in existence today which
as part of an anti-communist program
maintained vast files on the political
activities of their fellow Americans
prominent among these groups are the
American Security Council and the church
League of America see Harold C R Illya
Hawks Nest the American Security Council
the nation the 214 January 24 1972 113
through 117 George Thayer the farther
shores of politics New York Simon &
Schuster 1967 pages 256 through 262
Wallace Turner anti-communist Council
prepares
voting index on Congress New York Times
August 17th 1970 William W Turner power
on the right Berkley ramparts press 1971
pages 134 through 141 99 32:15 and
footnote
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you